The Joe Rogan experience. People think about overpopulation.
One things that you should take into consideration is that as populations, uh,
increase in places urbanize, the actual birth rate goes down. That's right.
To the point where places like Japan,
there's actually a concern that they're not having enough children.
That's right.
Yeah. And of course it is driven by prosperity. Yes. And, you know,
female education and emancipation and so on. Mm-hmm <affirmative>. Yes.
So at this point, if you look at the largest countries in the world,
the largest dozen countries in the world, the only one that has a really high,
um, fertil fraternity rate still is Nigeria. You know,
if you exclude Subha in Africa, it's basically a completely solved problem.
Really?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> Nigeria is the only one. Yeah.
If you look at the big countries.
You would not expect like Bangladesh or Pakistan or India, you know,
the fratern rate is down below three now. Really? Yeah.
That's interesting.
So their population will level out over the next few decades.
Well, it has, yeah. It's getting people. I mean, it's still declining, you know,
it plummeting, you know, people often used to say that the,
any reason why China's fertility raise low is because of the one child policy,
which of course they have now discontinued precisely because of problems like
this. Mm-hmm <affirmative>. Um, but it's not true. I mean,
other countries were a little bit behind the one child policy did certainly
accelerate the process.
But if you look at Brazil or Indonesia or any of these countries,
you'll see exactly the same phenomenon plummeting.
Have you thought about what the future looks like when people lived to be four
or 500 years old? Like how, first of all, how wise will people be?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> that's what's really interesting cuz so.
Okay. So here's,
here's a really important thing that I wanna get across when we think
about longevity. Well,
actually three things I wanna say, first of all,
longevity is a side effect of health. Right? Right. So, you know,
a huge amount of the so-called debate that goes on about the desirability of all
of this just goes away.
When you remember that people actually quite like being healthy,
but in terms of how the world will be, which is a question you asked,
there's two questions here. It, one question is how will the world actually be?
And the second question is how will people in the near term expect the world to
be? And the reason why those two questions are,
are important to distinguish is because the question of how the world will
actually be, is very obviously completely unanswerable.
Even if we look 50 years in the future. I mean, if you look 50 years ago, right?
How much of what we have today would've been predicted, right? Yeah.
It world completely different. And certainly internal longevity, you know,
we're only gonna be getting older at one year per year.
That won't actually be any 500 year old people for another 400 years. Right?
Oh really? Well, yeah. I mean.
Oh no, I don't know what you're gonna be able to do.
You, we're not gonna be able to change the PA change.
The rate of the passage of time is my point. Right?
I understand what you're saying. Right. But.
Expectation is a completely different thing. And here's why that matters.
There's gonna become a point.
There's gonna come a point where people in general,
the general man in the street starts to realize that they're
probably going to live an awfully long time because they're not gonna just get
progressively sicker as they get older. And you know,
lots of other reasons are gonna exist. Why they're gonna live a long time.
Like I have self-driving cars that pretty much eliminate, you know,
road accidents and so on.
So they're going to want a lot of different things
than what they wanted when they thought they were gonna live only slightly
longer than their parents. They're gonna want very different pension plans,
very different life insurance health, I very different inheritance arrangements.
And these are huge big ticket items, right?
They basically drive the global economy.
So policy makers and decision makers around the world had well better be ready
for that shift in public expectation of how long they're gonna
live. Right? Yes.
Now therefore it is absolutely critical to
estimate and to communicate the estimate of how soon
that shift in public expectation is going to occur,
which means how well, what events have to happen,
how much progress needs to happen in order for that in order to,
in order to cause that shift. Now, this is where I am terrified
because I think it's gonna happen really soon.
I think it could easily happen in the next three to five years
and that when it does happen,
it's gonna happen in suddenly here's the sequence of events that I think is
gonna happen. Step one,
we're going to have sufficient progress in the laboratory or the clinic
that most of my scientific colleagues are going to be
willing to come out and say more or less. Yeah. Bri gray was right. All along.
They're gonna say, yeah. You know, it's, you're very excited about that.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> no, I'm terrified.
And I'm gonna tell you why you're a little excited, a little excited. I mean,
I know I have been a <laugh> recognition is never something that's driven me.
Um, um, but yeah, they're gonna, they're gonna come out and say, yeah,
it's only a matter of time before we let this aging thing now,
what do you think is gonna happen next? You're a media guy, right?
Here's what I think's gonna happen, but I want your,
I wanna know whether you think I'm right. Okay.
I think the next thing's gonna happen is that real opinion forms people like
you, people like Oprah,
Oprah Winfrey are going to hear that being said and written,
you know, in the media and they're gonna say, oh,
this is actually gonna happen. And they're gonna say so on air.
And they're going, not only to say, say what their opinion is,
but they're gonna say what they think people ought to do in particular.
They're gonna say, well, look, you know, let's actually, if we're, if,
if it's only a matter of time,
if we're losing 110,000 people every day worldwide to this
phenomenon,
then we do kind of have a bit of a moral obligation to make it less time if we
can't. So my sense is that once that happens,
the following day, it's gonna become impossible to get elected.
Unless you have a manifesto commitment to, you know, have a war on aging,
you know, throw proper money at this. I mean,
I really mean a proper war on aging,
not just like the war on cancer was lots of money, not just to do the research,
but also to front load all of the investment in infrastructure and you know,
training and medical personnel and so on. Okay.
And everyone's gonna, I know it like the world,
the public is going to make that switch.
I just mentioned of expectation like at once.
So it's gonna be ridiculously sudden once it happens.
And the first step is going to be that shift in what my
colleagues in the biogyrontology community feel able to say
on camera and on stage. Now,
therefore the question is what amount of progress is gonna be
required for that to occur? Now here's the thing. There aren't very many of us,
it's a small field.
The number of people at the top of the field who actually talk to the media
quite a bit is, you know, a dozen maximum there's me, this's David that'.
You had on the show, there's, you know,
very few others and we all know each other. We're all good mates, right?
So we know exactly where our heads are.
You know what the drivers are,
the number one reason why my colleagues don't already
say what I say is funding.
The fact that unlike me,
those people are reliant for most of the money
that drives their research
on peer reviewed government, money, government grants.
And they just won't get them.
If it's possible to accuse those,
accuse them of saying irresponsible things for the media,
things that get people's hopes up, undoly remember,
there's hardly there's, there's nowhere near enough money.
There's less than 10% of the necessary money to fund research at the moment.
So the committees that decide who gets money and who doesn't are always
desperately scouting around for reasons to say no,
that can be justified and saying, oh,
this guy says irresponsible things to the media is a totally safe way to say
no. Right? So anyway, so this is, this is the problem.
This is why my colleagues have to be really pretty curmogenently.
Even David David is probably the person out of my colleagues who pushes the
envelope as much as possible out of people who have regular faculty positions.
But, you know, he's just written a book, which I see you have on yourself.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> called, you know, uh, why we age and why we don't have to,
he could not have written that book with that title five years ago and kept his
job. Wow. Um, so, you know,
the question is how much has to change and actually it's not very much,
you know, there's a balance here. There's a, there's a,
there's a tension here between, on the one hand,
not saying things that can be characterized as they're responsible,
but on the other hand,
not saying things that could be character characterized as simply untrue,
<laugh> like, right. So the more progress is made in the laboratory,
not even in the clinic, just with mice, right? In terms of actually, you know,
rejuvenating them,
making them live longer with treatments that were given to those mice when they
were already in middle age, the more progress is made. Um, you know,
the more impossible it's gonna be to carry on being pessimistic and refusing to,
uh, to, to make timeframe predictions or anything like that.
So there's a, almost a forced pessimism, correct?
That's created by the establishment. Correct. Well,
I think what you're saying makes a ton of sense in that once it does get to the
point where this is undeniable, this is peer reviewed, proven,
established science, and also implementable mm-hmm <affirmative>.
This is something that can be
at scale mm-hmm <affirmative> distributed worldwide. Yeah.
Things are gonna get real weird. So people.
Are already,
people are obviously still gonna be saying it can't be done in humans. You know,
it can't really be done, you know, until the cows come home, you know,
just in the same ways has had happened for any other pioneering technology
throughout history.
But what matters is what the center of gravity of expert least
stated expert opinion is.
It is a really, really polar housing subject. I mean, it,
it is funny how,
what you're saying brings so true that academics and intellectuals have to be
cautious about talking about even what is potentially possible,
even though in private,
they probably are more than aware that there's just a few steps to go
before this stuff gets implemented. And we see really catastrophic,
I mean really spectacular, rather changes. Yeah. And I mean.
I'm not saying that all of us absolutely agree on a hundred percent on
everything in the science.
Certainly I would say that I'm slightly on the optimistic end of the spectrum of
expert opinion. But yeah,
my colleagues are not all that far behind me in terms of what they would say.
The timeframes are.
What you're saying in terms of people discussing it in the media makes absolute
sense to me that as soon as that, that Pandora's box gets opened,
then people are going to be looking to establish clinics everywhere. And it's,
it could be very strange. Well.
Even if, even if,
even if a lot of these things are not yet available for clinical use,
even if some of them are still at the beginning of the clinical trial process,
and we're still maybe 10 or 15 years away from the R Mackay, you know,
that will still be enough to trigger this pemonian. Mm.
And that's why policy makers decision makers in every way and both in government
and in key aspect of industry need to, I,
I call it anticipticipate the anticipation they need to be,
have already thought through and prepared for this change
in public expectation of how long they're gonna live. So you.
Think that this, uh,
one day a will be a gigantic public issue in terms of elected
representatives,
that they they're gonna need to have some sort of an anti-aging policy mm-hmm.
<Affirmative> that's right. And the switch from essentially situation normal.
But this is usual to this completely new world will be ridiculously
sudden it'll happen in a week.
So.